# Preface

I know, I know... it was about time. But as Ralph Waldo Emerson famously put it: *“It’s not the destination, it’s the journey”*. And believe me, it has been a long but an amazing one. A journey that started with a 9000 km trip from my native Colombia to Belgium in 2017. I decided to cross the Atlantic Ocean, despite already living at the better end of it (Caribbean, am I right?), leave everything and everyone that I knew behind, and try to pursue my life-long dream of traversing the world. However, I didn’t just decide to do a PhD to travel and see the world. That would not have been very smart. The main motivation came from my previous academic experiences during my master’s degree in the Universidad del Cauca. There I had the opportunity to have a first glimpse of what research was about, published my first papers, attended my first international conference, and I loved it.

I looked hard and around for the opportunity to continue an academic career, hopefully in a top institution and next to top researchers, while working in industry in the meantime. Almost 3 years after finishing my Master, the opportunity came on a random afternoon at the office, while scrolling through Facebook. My friend and former colleague at Universidad del Cauca, Leandro, posted about a PhD position at Ghent University. He was already living in Belgium and was working at Ghent University, although in a different research group. So my first thank you goes to you compadre and your very fortunate Facebook post that allowed me to apply to this PhD position and kickstart this life changing adventure. (I promise that I don’t check social media while at the office anymore. In any case Facebook stopped being cool a long time ago and I am too old for TikTok). Funny story, while applying to the lab, my interviewers forgot to account for the time difference between Colombia and Belgium and set an online meeting at 5 am Colombian time. I happily took it because having to take it at the office would have been way more awkward than scrolling Facebook, but as I was told later, that situation reflected my commitment (which was real) and helped me get selected.

Coming all the way to Ghent was accompanied by a rollercoaster of emotions. I was excited to start a new chapter in my life, but also scared of the unknown. One person was and has always been there to help me navigate through all of this, whether it was work-related or not. My next thank you needs to go to Pieter C., who has been present at all the stages of this PhD, including the 5 am interview, but also receiving me at the airport when I first landed in Belgium and giving me an immediate and slightly jet-lagged tour around the best city in the world! Thank you Pieter for believing in me, for giving me the opportunity to join KNoWS and specially for supplying me with a continuous and endless amount of enthusiasm for everything we did and still do. I am very grateful for all this time working together and for all the things I have learnt from you.

Joining KNoWS allowed me to meet a group of extremely talented people. So talented, that it was inevitable to face harsh case of impostor syndrome shortly after joining. But, I will never forget one day that I went to eat later than usual to Resto De Brug alone. There I was, questioning my life choices, when coincidentally Ruben V. walked in and joined me. He kindly asked how I was feeling so far in the lab and that conversation leads to my next thank you. Thank you Ruben for giving me the boost of confidence and motivation that I needed to keep going. But also for being a continuous source of inspiration over these years.

While I am at it, I also want to thank all my past and current colleagues at KNoWS for countless enriching conversations, smooth collaborations and nice moments. Thank you Anastasia (I’ll get back to you, I promise 😛), Arthur, Beatriz, Ben, Brecht, Bryan-Elliott, Cristian, Danica, Dieter D., Dieter D. P., Dörthe, Dwight, Dylan, Elias, Els, Esther, Femke, Gayane, Gerald, Gertjan, Gilles, Harm, Ieben, Jeroen, Jiao, Joachim, Jonas, Jonni, Jos, Katrien, Kush, Laurens, Maarten, Mathijs, Martin, Miel, Patrick, Pieter B., Pieter H., Raf, Ruben D, Ruben E., Ruben T., Shamz, Shehab, Sindhu, Sitt Min Oo, Stijn, Sven, Thomas, Tom, Vidya, Wout and Wouter. A special thank you to Erik who at the very beginning made possible my hiring at the lab and during a large part of this PhD was acting behind the scenes to make sure that everything was running smoothly. Thank you also to Kristof, Laura, Joke and all the administrative staff at IDLab, UGent and imec.

As this book reflects, my PhD was only possible thanks to the help and support of many people and to the work carried out over several projects and collaborations. First of all, I want to thank specially all my examination committee members prof. Filip De Turck, prof. Steven Verstock, prof. Marina Aguado, prof. Luis Daniel Ibañez, prof. Pieter Bonte and Dr. Philippe Michiels for their time and effort in evaluating this work, and the valuable feedback they provided. I want to thank all the people that I had the pleasure to work with during these years. Specially to Oscar and David, with whom I collaborated in my very first project at KNoWS and always have a blast on every conference we attend together. To Pieter M., Han and Wout B., with whom I worked in the Velopark project. To Marina, Polymnia, Ivo, Dragos, Ghis and all the ERA team for trusting me and without whom certainly this PhD would have not been possible. Bottom line, a big thank you to all the project partners and co-authors I was lucky to work with during these years.

I also need to mention the person responsible for me having a never-ending urge to keep on exploring the world, my mother Olga. From very early on she always worked hard to keep on showing me how big and amazing the world was, and how much there was to learn from it. At the same time my father Eduardo taught me the importance of hard work and dedication, and how cool was to be the one that knew everything about almost anything. My brother Juan Sebastian was always my partner in crime and the source of many fun times. Thanks for holding the fort. I love you all and I am very grateful for all the effort and support you continue to give me. Thank you also to all my friends in Colombia, Belgium and around the world. Most of you I don’t see very often, but whenever we do it always feels like time didn’t go by.

Finally, I want to thank the most important person in my life, my love and partner in life, Anastasia (I told you I’d get back to you 😉). If there is something I will always be grateful to KNoWS, is for having met you. A big part of the credit for this PhD certainly goes to you. You had my back at all times, you were there to listen to me, to support me, to motivate me, to inspire me. I am very lucky to have you in my life and I am very grateful for all the love and happiness you bring me. I love you, I love our family and I can’t wait to continue living my dream of traversing the world, but this time by your side.
