# Introduction

*"The nice thing about standards is that you have so many to choose from"*
<div style="text-align: right">— Andrew Tanenbaum, professor at VU University Amsterdam</div>

The last couple of decades have witnessed a rapid and transformative evolution of data-related technologies. We have seen the discussion moving from Big Data [@@Marx_Nature_2013, @@Chen_MNA_2014], which gained traction at the beginning of the century with the rise of Web traffic and the accelerated growth of companies like Google, Amazon, Meta, etc; all the way to transversal and all-encompassing data-driven economies [@@Richter_IIC_2019, @@Cavanillas_SC_2016] supported on Data Spaces [@@Curry_SIP_2022, @@Prinz_SC_2022, @@Otto_EM_2019, @@Curry_SC_2020]. One key challenge has been and continues to be at the core of the data-related technological evolution: data interoperability [@@Pagano_DSC_2013, @@Kadadi_ICBD_2014]. Recent attempts at understanding the complexities and challenges for achieving interoperability across data systems, agree on presenting a multidimensional view of it, showing that it goes beyond a mere technical issue and that a multidisciplinary effort would be required to address it [@@EUC_PO_2017, @@Candela_DL_2010]. This doctoral dissertation shows how data interoperability can start to be tackled with Semantic Web [@@Shadbolt_IIS_2006], Linked Data [@@Bizer_IJSWIS_2009] and Knowledge Graph [@@Hogan_ACM_2021] technologies, concretely by showing real examples where these technologies have been applied in the transport domain.

The concepts of Semantic Web, Linked Data and Knowledge Graph represent a progressive evolution [@@Scherp_TGDK_2024] of the original vision introduced by Tim Berners-Lee et al [@@Berners-Lee_SA_2001], aiming to extend the capabilities of the Web by adding structure and meaning to its content through metadata and ontologies. Each term comprises different aspects and in their own time, had a slightly different focus: Semantic Web emphasised semantic enrichment of Web content, Linked Data highlighted the importance of interconnection of data sources published over the Web and Knowledge Graphs continue to prioritise the representation of knowledge as graph-based structures. Nevertheless, they all share the same foundational and technological principles, having RDF[^fn1] and some of its related standards as common denominators. In this doctoral dissertation, I will continue to refer in general to these sets of concepts and technologies as Linked Data technologies given its focus on publishing interoperable data on the Web.

Linked Data technologies were originally conceived as eminently decentralised technologies that would allow the development of applications, seamlessly accessing, querying and processing data from different locations and providers over the Web. This would be possible thanks to the existence of an also decentralised network of ontologies through which these applications (a.k.a intelligent agents [@@Hendler_Nature_1999]) would perform logical reasoning and understand the data sources they represent. However, in practice the implementation of Linked Data technologies has not been really decentralised and has focused mainly on the development of centralised storage and querying technologies of semantically annotated data [@@Ali_VLDB_2022]. A proof of this is the fact that currently the main highlights of Linked Data technologies are massively centralised knowledge graphs such as Wikidata[^fn2] and centralised data models such as schema.org[^fn3] [@@Polleres_SW_2020]. The reasons behind this deviation from the original vision may be attributed to the additional challenges that truly decentralised system architectures face regarding scalability and query performance [@@Verborgh_ISWC_2018]. Yet, from a diametrically opposed point of view, it remains a practical impossibility to consider the centralisation of all data on the Web[^fn4] and in many cases, even within single organisations. This leads to considering in-between solutions as the most likely scenario towards the future, having the recent initiatives of Data Spaces as examples, advocating for controlled, trustful and decentralised data ecosystems [@@Otto_EM_2019, @@Curry_SC_2020], where efficient and automated data access would be made possible across a finite set of trusted data stakeholders. This PhD work embraces this vision and focuses on studying practical solutions, based on Linked Data technologies, that could enable the creation of decentralised applications over the Web.

Historically there has been a predominant negative perception in industry about Linked Data technologies, which are usually deemed by practitioners as too complex for practical scenarios and not production-ready[^fn5] [^fn6] [^fn7] [^fn8] [^fn9] [@@Marshall_HT_2003]. These perceptions started to change in recent years, specially since the announcement of the Google Knowledge Graph [^fn10] , and currently we can observe an increased adoption with industrial examples in the biomedical [@@Salvadores_SW_2013], pharmaceutical [@@Fernandez_ESWC_2020], manufacturing [@@Kalayci_ISWC_2020, @@Hubauer_IWSW_2018], tourism[^fn11] , news[^fn12] [@@Kobilarov_SBH_2009] and (e-)commerce sectors[^fn13] [^fn14] [@@Lassila_SW_2023, @@Li_CIKM_2020], among others. This doctoral dissertation tries to be one more piece of evidence coming from the transport sector.

I opted to focus on the transport domain and study the application of Linked Data technologies mainly due to the high importance that transportation has in our daily lives, for instance, influencing how much time we spend getting to school or work and determining where we choose to live. Similarly, the transport sector offers challenging organisational and data ecosystems. Public and private organisations (varying depending on the country) need to interact, putting forward a high demand for interoperability solutions within and across country borders [@@MaaSAlliance_2021]. Also, heterogeneous datasets of spatiotemporal nature need to be integrated to support the provision of complex and critical transportation services such as public transportation and logistics services. I had the fortune to be involved in several transport-related projects during these PhD years, which provided me with concrete goals and real use case scenarios to study Linked Data technologies as a potential interoperability solution.

This PhD dissertation, studies if and how data interoperability in the transport domain could be addressed in practice with Linked Data technologies. First in [section 1.1](ch_1.1_ld-and-sa.md), a brief introduction is given to the basic concepts around Linked Data technologies and the related system architectures proposed for its implementation. Then, [section 1.2](ch_1.2_eu-interop.md) presents the context and motivations for this work, which are framed within the European strategy for interoperability. The main reason being that the application scenarios studied in this work, took place in the European context. [Section 1.3](ch_1.3_web-apis.md) elaborates on more concrete technical challenges related to under-specified top-down initiatives advocating for data interoperability by design, also aggravated by a lack of truly interoperable, performant and cost-efficient technical solutions. Later in [section 1.4](ch_1.4_research-goals.md), the concrete research challenges are described, followed by the main contributions of this work in [section 1.5](ch_1.5_contributions.md). [Section 1.6](ch_1.6_impact.md) presents the impact achieved thanks to having the opportunity to work on a set of real use cases, and [section 1.7](ch_1.7_publications.md) lists all the related publications. Lastly, [section 1.8](ch_1.8_outline.md) describes the outline of the rest of this PhD dissertation.

[^fn1]: <https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-primer/>
[^fn2]: <https://www.wikidata.org/>
[^fn3]: <https://schema.org>
[^fn4]: Despite the restless data hoarding efforts of companies like Google, Meta, etc.
[^fn5]: <https://www.downes.ca/post/40884>
[^fn6]: <https://web.archive.org/web/20220602202150/https://www.libraryjournal.com/story/the-linked-data-myth>
[^fn7]: <https://web.archive.org/web/20080907234451/http://www.getsemantic.com/wiki/Arguments_against_the_Semantic_Web>
[^fn8]: <https://twobithistory.org/2018/05/27/semantic-web.html>
[^fn9]: <http://inamidst.com/whits/2008/ditching>
[^fn10]: <https://blog.google/products/search/introducing-knowledge-graph-things-not/>
[^fn11]: <https://medium.com/airbnb-engineering/scaling-knowledge-access-and-retrieval-at-airbnb-665b6ba21e95>
[^fn12]: <https://archive.nytimes.com/open.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/03/30/build-your-own-nyt-linked-data-application/>
[^fn13]: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s_xE_nfxrdI&ab_channel=TheKnowledgeGraphConference>
[^fn14]: <https://engineering.zalando.com/posts/2018/03/semantic-web-technologies.html>
